docs(release-notes): add 8.10 release (#5575)
canonical/snapcraft: docs/release-notes/snapcraft-8-10.rst

.. _release-8.10:

Snapcraft 8.10 release notes
============================

7 July 2025

Learn about the new features, changes, and fixes introduced in Snapcraft 8.10.

Requirements and compatibility
------------------------------

See :ref:`reference-system-requirements` for information on the minimum hardware and
installed software.

What's new
----------

Snapcraft 8.10 brings the following features, integrations, and improvements.

.NET plugin (v2)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The :ref:`craft_parts_dotnet_v2_plugin` is now available for core24 snaps. We've
introduced a new version of the plugin that is easier to use and configure.

Older bases will continue to use the :ref:`previous version <craft_parts_dotnet_plugin>`
of the dotnet plugin.

Init profile for ROS 2 applications
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A new init profile, ``ros2``, has been added. This profile makes it easier for developers

> to create a ROS 2 snap.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to create an ROS 2 snap.
```
We may have discussed this before, but this is how we've used the article in the docs.

Author: https://github.com/canonical/snapcraft/pull/5575/commits/b74209193b1fba0ea13b8ccf46723cc5fd7a62fe

Improved ``test`` command
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The ``CRAFT_ARTIFACT`` environment variable can now be used in tests and contains the
full path to the snap file being tested.

Additionally, the user experience of the ``test`` command has been cleaned up and
improved.

Minor features
--------------

Snapcraft 8.10 brings the following minor changes.

``CMAKE_PREFIX_PATH`` for the GNOME extension
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> The GNOME extension now sets the ``CMAKE_PREFIX_PATH`` in the build-environment to the
> stage directory and the GNOME SDK snap.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
During the build step, the GNOME extension now points the ``CMAKE_PREFIX_PATH`` environment variable to the GNOME SDK snap inside the stage directory.
```

After reviewing the commit, I believe this is correct.

However, I'd like to urge making the _value_ more palpable to the user. Let's mention that this fixes multiple active snaps, like you did in #5461.

Author: Good idea, I've rewritten it to talk about the value to the user: https://github.com/canonical/snapcraft/pull/5575/commits/b74209193b1fba0ea13b8ccf46723cc5fd7a62fe

It does point to the GNOME SDK snap and stage directory separately.

If a part using the :ref:`craft_parts_cmake_plugin` needs to override this variable,
it should be done with the ``build-environment`` key instead of ``cmake-parameters:
[-DCMAKE_PREFIX_PATH]``.

Summaries for confdb schemas
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The ``edit-confdb-schema`` command now supports a top-level
``summary`` key and a ``summary`` key in each view of a `confdb schema
<https://snapcraft.io/docs/configure-with-confdb>`_.

Validation set sequence warning
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If a user forgets to increment the sequence when editing a `validation set
<https://snapcraft.io/docs/validation-sets>`_, it can prevent snaps from being able to
revert to a valid state.

The :ref:`ref_commands_edit-validation-sets` command will now warn the user if the
sequence hasn't been incremented and prompt them to re-edit the set before submitting
it.

Documentation feedback button
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

We've added a feedback button to the top of all pages to make it easier to report issues
with the documentation.

> Documentation for setting up Snapcraft

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Updated guidance for setting up Snapcraft
```

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The :ref:`how-to-set-up-snapcraft` page has been rewritten based on user feedback and
testing.

Scheduled feature deprecations
------------------------------

The following features will be deprecated in a future major release:

Old command aliases
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Previous Snapcraft releaeses have renamed commands and aliased the old command names to
> the new command names.
> 
> This release adds a deprecation warning when an old command name is used. The old
> commands still work but will be removed in a future release.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Previous Snapcraft releases renamed commands, and aliased the old command names to
the new command names.

This release adds a deprecation warning when an old command name is used. The old
command names are still available, but will be removed in a future release.
```

behavior. For more information, see :ref:`explanation-remote-build`.

Fixed bugs and issues
---------------------

The following issues have been resolved in Snapcraft 8.10.

Snapcraft 8.10.0
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- `#5161`_ Invalid text in the ``SNAPCRAFT_STORE_CREDENTIALS`` environment variable now
  emits an error instead of a traceback.

- `#5167`_ If a file called ``snap`` exists in the project directory, Snapcraft now
  emits an error instead of a traceback.

- `#5539`_ Snapcraft no longer emits internal deprecation warnings when running on
  Python 3.13.

- ``CRAFT_PARALLEL_BUILD_COUNT`` and ``CRAFT_MAX_PARALLEL_BUILD_COUNT`` are now
  forwarded to managed instances.

Contributors
------------

We would like to express a big thank you to all the people who contributed to
this release.

:literalref:`@artivis<https://github.com/artivis>`,
:literalref:`@astrojuanlu<https://github.com/astrojuanlu>`,
:literalref:`@bepri<https://github.com/bepri>`,
:literalref:`@cmatsuoka<https://github.com/cmatsuoka>`,
:literalref:`@edisile<https://github.com/edisile>`,
:literalref:`@j-g00da<https://github.com/j-g00da>`,
:literalref:`@jahn-junior<https://github.com/jahn-junior>`,

> :literalref:`@mdubelko<https://github.com/mdubelko>`,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:literalref:`@medubelko<https://github.com/medubelko>`,
```

:literalref:`@mr-cal<https://github.com/mr-cal>`,
:literalref:`@lengau<https://github.com/lengau>`,
:literalref:`@nandedamana<https://github.com/nandedamana>`,
:literalref:`@panagiotisevaggelou<https://github.com/panagiotisevaggelou>`, and

> :literalref:`@pedro-avalos<https:/github.com/pedro-avalo>`,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:literalref:`@pedro-avalos<https://github.com/pedro-avalos>`,
```

Author: https://github.com/canonical/snapcraft/pull/5575/commits/b74209193b1fba0ea13b8ccf46723cc5fd7a62fe
